# Rust Compilers and the Rust Spec

## Disclaimer

The author of this post is a Lead and Developer of the LCCC project. This post is does not represent the views of the LCCC Project and is purely the opinion of the author.

The author of this post does work on the Rust Specification along side the Specification Team. This post is not intended to represent any consensus of that team, nor any demand to that team, merely as an opinion to consider.

## Background of the Rust Spec

Work on the Rust Specification was started by a mandate put forth in [RFC 3355](https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/3355-rust-spec.html),
 as a result of that RFC, a Formal Team was created, which started work on the Rust Specification in November of 2023. 

While a complete developmental history of the Spec is not in scope for this, as of the date of writing (March 14th, 2024), the process has roughly been:
* (Pre 2023-11) Background work, initial setup, Foundation Hires an Editor
* (2023-11) T-spec setup work, meeting arrangements, first official meeting
* (2023-12 - 2024-01) Tooling discussions, first sample chapters written and presented to Team/Stakeholders
* (2024-01 - 2024-02) Review of sample chapters, refinement of tooling discussions, discussions (including with teams) on Specification Structure
* (2024-03) First direct work started on Rust Specification Chapters

The Rust Specification does not define the language, but merely describes the language. From the specification RFC
> The goal is not to change how the language evolves; the relevant teams (Language, Libs-API, …) remain in charge of the evolution of their respective parts of Rust, and will continue to use processes as they see fit (e.g. RFCs).

However, it is anticipated that the evolution process will eventually include work on the spec, ensuring that once the spec is in a "complete" state, it will remain in that state in sync with the rest of the language.

## Background of Rust Compilers/Implementations

The first Rust compiler, being the Reference compiler, known commonly as the program `rustc` (and this blog will continue to refer to it as `rustc`) was released in the stable 1.0 version in May 2015. As the reference implementation, the evolution of `rustc` corresponds exactly to the evolution of the Rust Programming language, with a new stable version of each every 6 weeks - the most recent one as of the date of writing being Rust 1.76 (released on Februrary 8th, 2024) with the next stable version being Rust 1.77 (stable on March 21st, 2024)[^1]. 

The first alternative compiler of rust, `mrustc` started development even before the first stable version of rust (With a first commit to the mrustc repository on Novmeber 28th, 2014). `mrustc`, developed primarily by thepowersgang on github, is primarily intended to ease the bootstrapping process of `rustc`, by providing a compilation path to various versions of `rustc` through a non-rust language (in the case of `mrustc`, C++14). The exact development history of `mrustc` could not be discovered by the author in the 15 minutes of research done on it, but currently it supports Rust 1.19, Rust 1.29, Rust 1.39, and Rust 1.54, with Rust 1.74 support being actively worked on. The support for Rust 1.54, the most recent fully supported version, was added in December of 2021.

The second alternative compiler of rust, `gcc-rs` also started sometime in 2014. However, the most recent iteration of work largely started in 2019. The current status is a work in progress implementation targetting rust 1.49. 

The third alternative compiler is part of the `lccc` project (which I work on). Inclusion of rust in the project began in 2020 under the group Lightning Creations when the project that then contained `lccc`, lcnix, considered using rust code as part of its development. While development of the top-level lcnix project was discontinued, many of its subprojects continued development (and many were absorbed into lccc). The entire project has seen a few iterations (two main ones in C++, one now in Rust with an MSRV of 1.54), and the Rust frontend itself several iterations. The most recent iteration of the Rust frontend began in 2023, with a bottom up test-iterative approach. 

## Rust Specification and Rust Implementations

The Specification RFC states the following in relation to alternative implementations
> It is not a primary goal of the specification to aid in the development of alternative Rust implementations, although authors of alternative compilers might still find the specification to be useful.

Based on discussions with project members[^2], this in particular refers to the fact the specification will not, as part of it's initial goal, be intended to validate implementations. However, in more recent discussions, it seems me that such implementations are not being considered as a consumer of the specification either. 

It is reasonable that the initial scope of the specification would not render it complete enough to fully validate an implementation and be used for that purpose, however I think it is reasonable to conclude that it should eventually include that scope and thus implementors as consumers is something the spec now should consider. 

## The Future of Rust

Currently, Rust has 4 different compilers, in various phases of development. In addition to `rustc`, developed in tandom with the prescriptive work of the Rust project by the lang team, libs-api team, types team, and operational semantics team, the current set of implementations are intent on ensuring compatibility in various manners (including collaboration with the project). However, such work currently requires substantial amounts of research work, that should eventually be ameliorated by the Rust Specification.

It is not reasonable to expect that all implementations of Rust in the future will start or continue to collaborate to the extent that the existing ones do now, and they might expect a specification to inform them of the necessary elements for conformance. The specification should thus eventually *be* that specification implementations want. In order to ensure that it will be, the work on the specification *now* should prepare it for that future. It does not necessarily need to be perfect now, but it should be able to be made as good as it needs to be in the future.

## Conclusion

Both lccc and gcc-rs have, as part of their stated goals, the promotion of the development of a Rust Specification. In my view, that goal is completed when any implementation can be written solely from the technical document signed off by the Rust Project as the official Rust Specification. 

The 4 existing compilers for Rust will not be the last ones, particularily if gcc-rs and/or lccc succeeds in producing a production compiler. In my opinion, there will be another production-targetting Rust implementation either complete or in-progress within 5 years of this post, and in 10 years there will be a more substantial sphere of competition. The Rust project, including the specification, should be ready for it. The Specification today should consider implementors as a class of consumer of the spec, and should accept implementors as stakeholders in the spec, albeit future stakeholders. It would not be good if we write a spec today that rejects implementors, to a design that cannot be adapted to one useful for ensuring compliance and thus compatibility, in a future where use of a compiler other than `rustc` is as commonplace as use of `rustc` itself.

[^1]: https://releases.rs/docs/1.77.0/
[^2]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/3355#issuecomment-1347822649

!{#copyright}
